---
layout: layouts/base.njk
title: Oh no.
text: true
---

I'm afraid what you're looking for doesn't exist!  
What you _have_ found, however, is:


**The Chaos** by <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerard_Nolst_Trenit%C3%A9" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Gerard Nolst Trenité</a>.

(I strongly recommend trying to read it out loud)  
(Or <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tfRSvTSY0d4" target="_blank" rel="noopener">listening to someone else</a> do it)


Dearest _creature_ in _creation_  
Studying English _pronunciation_,  
&emsp;&emsp;I will teach you in my verse  
&emsp;&emsp;Sounds like _corpse, corps, horse_ and _worse_.  

I will keep you, _Susy, busy_,  
Make your head with heat grow _dizzy_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Tear_ in eye, your dress you'll _tear_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Queer, fair seer, hear_ my _prayer_.  

_Pray_, console your loving poet,  
Make my coat look _new_, dear, _sew_ it!  
&emsp;&emsp;Just compare _heart, hear_ and _heard_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Dies_ and _diet_, _lord_ and _word_.  

_Sword_ and _sward, retain_ and _Britain_  
(Mind the latter how it's _written_).  
&emsp;&emsp;_Made_ has not the sound of _bade_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Say-said, pay-paid, laid_ but _plaid_.  

Now I surely will not _plague_ you  
With such words as _vague_ and _ague_,  
&emsp;&emsp;But be careful how you _speak_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Say:_gush, bush, steak, streak, break, bleak_,  

_Previous, precious, fuchsia, via_  
_Recipe, pipe, studding-sail, choir_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Woven, oven, how_ and _low_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Script, receipt, shoe, poem, toe_.  

Say, expecting fraud and _trickery_:  
_Daughter, laughter_ and _Terpsichore_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Branch, ranch, measles, topsails, aisles_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Missiles, similes_, and _reviles_.  

_Wholly, holly, signal, signing_,  
_Same, examining_, but _mining_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Scholar, vicar_, and _cigar_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Solar, mica, war_ and _far_.  

From "desire": _desirable-admirable_ from "admire",  
_Lumber, plumber, bier_, but _brier_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Topsham, brougham, renown_, but _known_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Knowledge, done, lone, gone, none, tone_,  

_One, anemone, Balmoral_,  
_Kitchen, lichen, laundry, laurel_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Gertrude, German, wind_ and _wind_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Beau, kind, kindred, queue, mankind_,  

_Tortoise, turquoise, chamois-leather_,  
_Reading, Reading, heathen, heather_.  
&emsp;&emsp;This phonetic labyrinth  
&emsp;&emsp;Gives _moss, gross, brook, brooch, ninth, plinth_.  

Have you ever yet _endeavoured_  
To pronounce _revered_ and _severed_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Demon, lemon, ghoul, foul, soul_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Peter, petrol_ and _patrol_?  

_Billet_ does not end like _ballet_;  
_Bouquet, wallet, mallet, chalet_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Blood_ and _flood_ are not like _food_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Nor is _mould_ like _should_ and _would_.  

_Banquet_ is not nearly _parquet_,  
Which exactly rhymes with _khaki_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Discount, viscount, load_ and _broad_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Toward_, to _forward_, to _reward_,  

_Ricocheted_ and _crocheting, croquet_?  
Right! Your pronunciation's OK.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Rounded, wounded, grieve_ and _sieve_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Friend_ and _fiend, alive_ and _live_.  

Is your r correct in _higher_?  
Keats asserts it rhymes _Thalia_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Hugh_, but _hug_, and _hood_, but _hoot_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Buoyant, minute_, but _minute_.  

Say _abscission_ with _precision_,  
Now: _position_ and _transition_;  
&emsp;&emsp;Would it tally with my _rhyme_  
&emsp;&emsp;If I mentioned _paradigm_?  

_Twopence, threepence, tease_ are _easy_,  
But _cease, crease, grease_ and _greasy_?  
&emsp;&emsp;_Cornice, nice, valise, revise_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Rabies_, but _lullabies_.  

Of such puzzling words as _nauseous_,  
Rhyming well with _cautious, tortious_,  
&emsp;&emsp;You'll _envelop_ lists, I hope,  
&emsp;&emsp;In a linen _envelope_.  

Would you like some more? You'll _have_ it!  
_Affidavit, David, davit_.  
&emsp;&emsp;To _abjure_, to _perjure_. _Sheik_  
&emsp;&emsp;Does not sound like _Czech_ but _ache_.  

_Liberty, library, heave_ and _heaven_,  
_Rachel, loch, moustache, eleven_.  
&emsp;&emsp;We say _hallowed_, but _allowed_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_People_, leopard, towed_ but _vowed_.  

Mark the difference, moreover,  
Between _mover, plover, Dover_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Leeches, breeches, wise, precise_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Chalice, but _police_ and _lice_,  

_Camel, constable, unstable_,  
_Principle, disciple, label_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Petal, penal, and _canal_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Wait, surmise, plait, promise, pal_,  

_Suit, suite, ruin, Circuit, conduit_  
Rhyme with "shirk it" and "beyond it",  
&emsp;&emsp;But it is not hard to tell  
&emsp;&emsp;Why it's _pall_, _mall_, but _Pall Mall_.  

_Muscle, muscular, gaol, iron_,  
_Timber, climber, bullion, lion_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Worm_ and _storm, chaise, chaos, chair_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Senator, spectator, mayor_,  

_Ivy, privy, famous_; _clamour_  
Has the a of _drachm_ and _hammer_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Pussy, hussy_ and _possess_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Desert_, but _desert, address_.  

_Golf, wolf, countenance, lieutenants_  
Hoist in _lieu_ of flags left _pennants_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Courier, courtier, tomb, bomb, comb_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Cow_, but _Cowper_, _some_ and _home_.  

"_Solder_, soldier! Blood is _thicker_",  
Quoth he, "than _liqueur_ or _liquor_",  
&emsp;&emsp;Making, it is sad but _true_,  
&emsp;&emsp;In bravado, much _ado_.  

_Stranger_ does not rhyme with _anger_,  
Neither does _devour_ with _clangour_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Pilot, pivot, gaunt_, but _aunt_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Font, front, wont, want, grand_ and _grant_.  

_ArseniC, specific, scenic_,  
_Relic, rhetoric, hygienic_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Gooseberry, goose, and close_, but _close_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Paradise_, rise, rose_, and _dose_.  

Say _inveigh, neigh_, but _inveigle_,  
Make the latter rhyme with _eagle_.  
&emsp;&emsp;Mind! _Meandering_ but _mean_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Valentine_ and _magazine_.  

And I bet you, dear, a _penny_,  
You say _mani_-(fold) like _many_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Which is wrong. Say _rapier, pier_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Tier_ (one who ties), but _tier_.  

_Arch, archangel_; pray, does _erring_  
Rhyme with _herring_ or with _stirring_?  
&emsp;&emsp;_Prison, bison, treasure trove_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Treason, hover, cover, cove_,  

_Perseverance, severance. Ribald_  
Rhymes (but _piebald_ doesn't) with _nibbled_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Phaeton, paean, gnat, ghat, gnaw_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Lien, psychic, shone, bone, pshaw_.  

Don't be _down_, my _own_, but _rough_ it,  
And distinguish _buffet_, buffet;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Brood, stood, roof, rook, school, wool, boon_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Worcester, Boleyn_, to _impugn_.  

Say in sounds correct and _sterling_  
_Hearse, hear, hearken, year_ and _yearling_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Evil, devil, mezzotint_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Mind the z! (A gentle hint.)  

Now you need not pay attention  
To such sounds as I don't mention,  
&emsp;&emsp;Sounds like _pores, pause, pours_ and _paws_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Rhyming with the pronoun _yours_;  

Nor are proper names _included_,  
Though I often heard, as you did,  
&emsp;&emsp;Funny rhymes to _unicorn_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Yes, you know them, _Vaughan_ and _Strachan_.  

No, my maiden, coy and _comely_,  
I don't want to speak of _Cholmondeley_.  
&emsp;&emsp;No. Yet _Froude_ compared with _proud_  
&emsp;&emsp;Is no better than _McLeod_.  

But mind _trivial_ and _vial_,  
_Tripod, menial, denial_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Troll_ and _trolley_, _realm_ and _ream_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Schedule, mischief, schism_, and _scheme_.  

_Argil, gill, Argyll, gill. Surely_  
May be made to rhyme with _Raleigh_,  
&emsp;&emsp;But you're not supposed to say  
&emsp;&emsp;_Piquet_ rhymes with _sobriquet_.  

Had this _invalid_ _invalid_  
Worthless documents? How _pallid_,  
&emsp;&emsp;How _uncouth_ he, _couchant_, looked,  
&emsp;&emsp;When for _Portsmouth_ I had booked!  

_Zeus, Thebes, Thales, Aphrodite_,  
_Paramour, enamoured, flighty_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Episodes, antipodes_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Acquiesce_, and _obsequies_.  

Please don't monkey with the _geyser_,  
Don't peel 'taters with my _razor_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Rather say in accents pure:  
&emsp;&emsp;_Nature, stature_ and _mature_.  

_Pious, impious, limb, climb, glumly_,  
_Worsted, worsted, crumbly, dumbly_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Conquer, conquest, vase, phase, fan_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Wan, sedan_ and _artisan_.  

The `th` will surely _trouble_ you  
More than `r`, `ch` or `w`.  
&emsp;&emsp;Say then these phonetic gems:  
&emsp;&emsp;_Thomas, thyme, Theresa, Thames_.  

_Thompson, Chatham, Waltham, Streatham_,  
There are more but I forget 'em-  
&emsp;&emsp;Wait! I've got it: _Anthony_,  
&emsp;&emsp;Lighten your anxiety.  

The archaic word _albeit_  
Does not rhyme with _eight_-you see _it_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_With_ and _forthwith_, one has voice,  
&emsp;&emsp;One has not, you make your choice.  

_Shoes, goes, does_. Now first say: _finger_;  
Then say: _singer, ginger, linger_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Real, zeal, mauve, gauze_ and _gauge_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Marriage, foliage, mirage, age_,  

_Hero, heron, query, very,_  
_Parry, tarry fury, bury,_  
&emsp;&emsp;_Dost, lost, post,_ and _doth, cloth, loth_  
&emsp;&emsp;_Job, Job, blossom, bosom, oath_  

_Faugh, oppugnant_, keen _oppugners_,  
_Bowing, bowing, banjo-tuners_  
&emsp;&emsp;_Holm_ you know, but _noes, canoes_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Puisne, truism, use_, to _use_?  

Though the difference seems _little_,  
We say _actual_, but _victual_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Seat, sweat, chaste, caste, Leigh, eight, height_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Put, nut, granite_, and _unite_.  

_Reefer_ does not rhyme with _deafer_,  
_Feoffer_ does, and _zephyr_, heifer.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Dull, bull, Geoffrey, George, ate, late_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Hint, pint, senate_, but _sedate_.  

_Gaelic, Arabic, pacific_,  
_Science, conscience, scientific_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Tour_, but _our, dour, succour, four_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Gas_, alas, and _Arkansas_.  

Say _manoeuvre, yacht_ and _vomit_,  
Next _omit_, which differs from it  
&emsp;&emsp;_Bona fide, alibi_  
&emsp;&emsp;_Gyrate, dowry_ and _awry_.  

_Sea, idea, guinea, area_,  
_Psalm, Maria_, but _malaria_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Youth, south, southern, cleanse_ and _clean_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Doctrine, turpentine, marine_.  

Compare _alien_ with _Italian_,  
_Dandelion_ with _battalion_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Rally_ with _ally_; _yea, ye_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Eye, I, ay, aye, whey, key, quay_!  

Say _aver_, but _ever, fever_,  
_Neither, leisure, skein, receiver_.  
&emsp;&emsp;Never guess-it is not safe,  
&emsp;&emsp;We say _calves, valves, half_, but _Ralf_.  

_Starry, granary, canary_,  
_Crevice_, but _device_, and _eyrie_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Face_, but _preface_, then _grimace_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Phlegm, phlegmatic, ass, glass, bass_.  

_Bass, large, target, gin, give, verging_,  
_Ought, oust, joust_, and _scour_, but _scourging_;  
&emsp;&emsp;_Ear_, but _earn_; and _ere_ and _tear_  
&emsp;&emsp;Do not rhyme with _here_ but _heir_.  

Mind the o of _off_ and _often_  
Which may be pronounced as _orphan_,  
&emsp;&emsp;With the sound of _saw_ and _sauce_;  
&emsp;&emsp;Also _soft_, lost, cloth and _cross_.  

_Pudding, puddle, putting. Putting_?  
Yes: at golf it rhymes with _shutting_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Respite, spite, consent, resent_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Liable_, but _Parliament_.  

_Seven_ is right, but so is _even_,  
_Hyphen, roughen, nephew, Stephen_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Monkey, donkey, clerk_ and _jerk_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Asp, grasp, wasp, demesne, cork, work_.  

`A` of _valour, vapid vapour_,  
`S` of _news_ (compare _newspaper_),  
&emsp;&emsp;`G` of _gibbet, gibbon, gist_,  
&emsp;&emsp;`I` of _antichrist_ and _grist_,  

_Differ_ like _diverse_ and _divers_,  
_Rivers, strivers, shivers, fivers_.  
&emsp;&emsp;_Once, but _nonce, toll, doll_, but _roll_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Polish, Polish, poll_ and _poll_.  

Pronunciation-think of _Psyche_!-  
Is a paling, stout and _spiky_.  
&emsp;&emsp;Won't it make you lose your _wits_  
&emsp;&emsp;Writing _groats_ and saying "grits"?  

It's a dark _abyss_ or _tunnel_  
Strewn with stones like _rowlock, gunwale_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Islington_, and _Isle_ of Wight,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Housewife, verdict_ and _indict_.  

Don't you think so, reader, _rather_,  
Saying _lather, bather, father_?  
&emsp;&emsp;Finally, which rhymes with _enough_,  
&emsp;&emsp;_Though, through, bough, cough, hough, sough, tough_??  

_Hiccough_ has the sound of _sup_...  
My advice is: GIVE IT UP!
